Finding and recruiting employees is
a key step in helping an organization
achieve its goals.
As a sub-delegated manager, you will be
asked to staff positions within your
section or work unit by finding the skills
and other attributes needed for the work.
Federal public service managers and
human resources professionals must comply
with a variety of policies and legislation
governing how staffing processes are conducted.
These laws, regulations and policies support and
promote impartial appointments, based on merit,
which help advance diversity and
inclusion in the workplace.
In this section you will learn to
identify your staffing needs,
recall your staffing obligations, and
recognize considerations for staffing a position.
This section should take you
approximately 20 minutes to complete.
In determining your staffing needs,
consider various sources of information.
A few good sources to begin with are your
business objectives, your organizational goals
and the public service workforce goals.
Considering your business objectives when
staffing will help ensure that your programs
and services are properly managed and delivered.
For clarity on business objectives,
consult documents such as business plans,
performance agreements, Treasury Board
submissions, and Cabinet documents.
When considering your business objectives,
ask yourself the following questions.
Do my objectives align with
the higher-level priorities?
And, what qualifications will contribute
to meeting the business requirements?
Business objectives are guided by organizational
and public service workforce goals.
Those goals are set
by the Clerk of the Privy Council,
the Treasury Board, deputy heads and management.
Here are some examples of priorities at this level:
building a diverse, equitable
and inclusive public service; correcting
conditions of disadvantage in employment;
placing employees who are affected
by workforce adjustment;
and building organizational capacity
and developing competencies.
Organizational and public service
workforce goals are framed by
legislation including the Public Service
Employment Act,
Accessible Canada Act,
Employment Equity Act,
Canadian Human Rights Act,
Official Languages Act,
and the Constitution of Canada;
agreements like the Nunavut Land Claims
Agreement and even the Canadian
Free Trade Agreement, as well as
your Minister's mandate, statements by
the Clerk of the Privy Council,
and the Speech from the Throne.
Before you initiate an appointment process,
it’s important to be acquainted with the legislation,
policies and guidelines that govern appointments.
These include the Public Service Commission’s
Appointment Framework and the Treasury Board’s
policy framework, as well as your
organizational staffing framework.
The purpose of the Employment Equity Act
is to achieve equality in the workplace
and to correct conditions of disadvantage
in employment for such designated groups as:
women, Aboriginal peoples,
persons with disabilities and
members of visible minorities.
The Act requires that every employer identify
and eliminate employment barriers against
persons in the identified groups.
Employers must also institute positive policies and
practices and make reasonable accommodations
to ensure their workforce reflects
the diversity of Canadians.
The Accessible Canada Act is intended to promote
the full and equal participation of all persons,
especially persons with disabilities, in society.
This act strives to proactively eliminate and
prevent barriers in seven areas under
federal jurisdiction, including employment,
in order to ensure greater opportunities
for persons with disabilities.
The Public Service Commission’s
Appointment Framework guides deputy heads
in building their own staffing systems
adapted to their needs and in ensuring that
they comply with legislative
and policy requirements.
It is made up of
1) the Public Service Employment Act
and any applicable exclusion approval orders
and regulations. The full list of List of Acts,
Regulations and Orders can be found online.
2) The Public Service Commission’s
Appointment Policy.
3) Appointment Delegation
and Accountability Instrument.
Components of the Treasury Board’s
policy framework also have a role to play
in the staffing process.
It refers to the following documents
(links available in the toolkit).
1) The Values and Ethics Code for the Public Sector,
which guides managers in their staffing thinking
and decision making.
2) The Financial Administration Act, in particular
the Human Resources Management section.
3) The Policy on People Management and
directives which cover deployments, assignments,
secondments, reclassifications, official languages
in relation to staffing, and the duty to accommodate
which outlines how to make staffing processes
as inclusive and accessible as possible.
4) Programs such as: employment equity,
diversity and inclusion, student programs,
and the Interchange Canada program.
5) Qualification standards in relation to education,
occupational certification, official languages
and other requirements to qualify for employment
in the core public service.
Watch this video on inclusive hiring, which
offers five tips on diversifying your workforce.
As a sub-delegated manager, you are responsible for
making decisions that are subdelegated to you and
for working in partnership with HR.
There are three lenses to apply
when staffing a position:
diversity, equity and inclusion;
business objectives and the judicious management
of resources; and integrity and ethics.
In order to conduct a fair and inclusive process
and to hire qualified individuals to form
a diverse workforce that reflects the Canadian
population and meets your organizational needs,
the following must be done.
Take into account employment equity objectives
and adopt inclusive practices.
Ensure that hiring processes are conducted
in good faith, are free from bias and
are impartial in a manner that is supportive
of an individual’s right to accommodation.
Establish effective merit criteria that reflect
the requirements of the position or work unit
and consider the organization's business needs.
For example, equity-seeking groups.
Select a process type
(appointment or administrative,
advertised or non-advertised,
internal or external).
Determine who will be eligible to apply
by establishing the area of selection or recourse.
Identify and seek to reduce unconscious biases
(recruitment, assessment, selection).
Conduct an objective assessment of
each candidate’s qualifications and
assess the candidate in their official language of
choice without regard to the location of the
official languages requirements of the position;
provide accommodations by being proactive
and responsive to requests;
gather enough information from each candidate
to make a fair decision;
use a variety of complementary sources and
assessment tools to increase the validity
and reliability of the assessment;
apply to each candidate the same standard
for a qualification, that is the same definition
or indicators) established for the process;
ensure the quality of the assessment
by consulting with experts and stakeholders
on the selection process and the development
of tools and their use in the assessment
of candidates.
Ensure appointments are based on merit
and respect the order of precedence.
Consider priority entitlement provisions,
preference for veterans, Canadian citizens,
permanent residents, and obligations set out
in claim agreements such as the Nunavut
Land Claims Agreement, and the
Canadian Free Trade Agreement.
For more details, please consult
the Appointment Delegation and Accountability
Instrument and the Appointment Policy.
To conduct an effective process that achieves
business objectives through the judicious
management of resources, consider:
keeping your staffing objectives
in mind throughout the process;
planning and preparing the staffing process
prior to launching it;
using flexibilities provided in the
Public Service Employment Act and
make reasonable adaptations
as the circumstances evolve; promoting
engagement and retention by being transparent
with applicants and employees.
To conduct a process based on integrity
and ethics these 5 steps are necessary.
Comply with the requirements of the staffing
framework (public service and departmental)
and exercise flexibility by suggesting solutions
and adaptations for the assessment tools
and approach in order to ensure a fair assessment
of each candidate’s qualifications.
Use one of the flexibilities provided for
in the Public Service Employment Act.
For example: focus exclusively on members
of designated employment equity groups
or expand the area of selection
that applies to these groups.
Establish an organizational need to
select individuals who have declared
that they belong to a designated group
that is currently or is expected to be
under-represented.
In a non-advertised process,
appoint a person belonging to one
of the designated groups.
Make reasonable decisions based on
valid and reliable information related to
each candidate and for each process.
Focus on merit rather than on likeability
or other sources of bias.
Be able to clearly explain decisions and
document appointment information including
your decisions and considerations.
Take what you have learned into real life!
Your organization will have
its own ways of doing things.
As a last step, locate some essential resources
to assist you in staffing effectively.
Your organizational staffing framework.
The mandate of your organization
(enabling legislation).
Your departmental instrument of sub-delegation.
Staffing policies, direction from the Deputy Head
and practices of your organization.
Identify and meet your HR advisors
and consult them before making decisions.
And as a sub-delegated manager, you have
many different options.
Remember to consult your HR advisor.
Take time out from the course to consult
the Public Service Commission’s Guides
and Tools web page.
These tools are designed
to assist managers involved
in the appointment process.
Test your knowledge by answering
the following questions.
Select “Submit” when you are done.